howdy folks welcome to the channel
today we're going to recap donnie darko
a sci-fi fantasy directed by richard
kelly
this mysterious film explores the themes
of time travel religion love and fear as
we view it through the perspective of a
boy named donnie darko
here be spoilers so viewers beware
the movie opens with a boy called donnie
darko
waking up in the middle of the road in
the hills of virginia as the sun comes
up he cycles back down the hill through
the town to his home
at the dinner table that evening donnie
argues with his older sister elizabeth
who reveals in front of his family that
donny has stopped taking his medication
he argues with his mom over it but takes
his meds that evening
when he goes to sleep a voice tells
donny to wake up he starts to sleepwalk
downstairs and goes outside the house
he sleepwalks to the end of the golf
course where he finds a humanoid rabbit
creature standing there it tells donnie
the world is going to end in 28 days 6
hours 22 minutes and 12 seconds
back at home the house is rocked by an
explosion
he wakes up on a golf course and sees
the timer for the world's end drawn on
his arm
he returns home to find a plane's engine
as crashed into his house destroying his
bedroom his family are put up into a
hotel
when he gets to school doni has become
the talk of the town for surviving the
crash into his bedroom
in his english class he meets gretchen
ross a girl who is new to the school the
teacher tells her to sit next to the
cutest boy and she chooses donnie
while donnie is in the car they almost
run over an old lady in the middle of
the road donnie gets out of the car to
check on her but she whispers to him
every living creature on this earth dies
alone
we next see donnie at an appointment
with a psychiatrist dr thurman
donnie tells dr thurman about his
visions of the rabbit whom he calls
frank
he tells her about the prophecy about
the end of the world
while in class donnie hears a voice
telling him to pay attention to the man
on screen jim cunningham
that night donny sleep walks again and
sees frank in his dreams
donnie carries an axe into a dark room
and chops a metal water pipe
while waiting at the bus stop they
discover that the school is closed due
to flooding from a burst water main we
also see an axe embedded into the statue
at the school and the writing on the
floor saying they made me do it
on his way back donnie spots gretchen
being harassed by two school bullies and
he walks her home she tells him about
why they moved to the area to get away
from her stepdad donnie tells her about
his own troubled past and asked her out
donnie continues to have therapy with dr
thurman who tries hypnosis on him she
asks him about school but all donnie can
talk about is sex
at school the police are investigating
who vandalized the school and caused the
flooding and they begin to suspect
donnie
donnie goes out shooting with his
friends and they have philosophical
discussions about smurfs
donnie spots the old lady in the road
grandma death almost getting run over
again
they say she spends all her days
standing in the road and checking her
mail
meanwhile donnie's gem teacher katie
farmer blames the act of vandalism on
his english teacher and the story she
assigned them to read donnie hears
frank's voice and sees him in the mirror
he tells donnie he can do anything he
wants
frank asked donnie if he believes in
time travel before he is interrupted by
his little sister donnie's gem teacher
attempts to introduce attitude lessons
through videos of a motivational speaker
called jim cunningham and a concept
based around fear and love
johnny defies his teacher and tries to
explain that life can't be explained in
a simple linear line
theme
this is an important scene that openly
explores the theme of fear and love that
exists in the film
donnie fears the rabbit and loves
gretchen donnie later talks about his
fear of being alone too it is fear that
drives many of ms farmer's actions
donnie asked his science teacher about
time travel the teacher gives him a book
called the philosophy of time travel
throughout the rest of the film we see
pages on the book appear on the screen
as donnie reads through them
donnie meets with his therapist again
and talks about what grandma death said
to him before about being alone he tells
her that he is scared of dying alone
after studying the book donnie starts to
perceive the future and he sees bubbles
which show him where people will move to
a bubble forms in front of him and he
follows it to the closet where he finds
a handgun
there are now 12 days left until the
predicted end of the world
donnie's parents visit the therapist dr
thurman who explains that donnie is
becoming increasingly detached from
reality
she tells him about his visions of a
giant bunny rabbit
meanwhile donnie sees frank in the
mirror again and tries to stab him with
a knife dr thurman suggests increasing
donny's medication to help him deal with
his visions jim cunningham speaks at the
school when he is invited to speak
donnie has another outburst and insults
jim
later he tells gretchen about the book
he is reading and has been describing
his visions they both talk about how
they wish they could go back and change
their troubled past
donnie finds a wallet on the ground and
discovers it belongs to jim cunningham
finding out where he lives donnie goes
on a date with gretchen to the cinema
while they are in the theater donnie
starts to hallucinate and sees frank
sitting with them in the cinema frank
takes his mask off and reveals his face
with one eye shot out frank tells donny
to burn cunningham's house to the ground
while cunningham is busy hosting a show
donnie spreads gasoline around his house
and sets it alight before heading back
to the cinema
firefighters turn up to investigate the
house and they discover a stash of child
pornography in the basement and
cunningham is arrested the arrest is
broadcast on the local news
back at the school donnie's english
teacher has been fired but allowed to
finish the rest of the week
in her next class donnie rails against
the idea that in the book they are
reading watership down the rabbits
represent humans theme this is another
important moment in the film doni says
that rabbits have no history no sorrow
or regret he talks about the primeval
nature of rabbits and that they simply
reproduce and die without fear of death
this ties into the theme of fear and its
purpose in life does fear of death make
you care more when someone dies is it
fear of death the reasons human plays so
much importance on history sorrow and
regret
dani refuses to accept the ideas that
his teachers believe in about the human
condition
meanwhile kitty farmer has decided to
defend cunningham against the charges
and ask donnie's mom if she will take
out the dance team to the event
donny's dad is also going to be out of
town so donnie and elizabeth are left on
their own
during therapy when dr thurman is
hypnotizing donnie he admits to burning
down cunningham's house and flooding the
school
he then sees frank standing in the room
donnie and elizabeth decide to host a
halloween costume party gretchen arrives
and tells donny that her mother has gone
missing donnie comforts her as they go
up to the bedroom together
donnie begins to see the bubbles in
front of people and has a deep vision he
realizes that the predicted end of the
world is only hours away and he takes
gretchen and two others to look for
grandma death at her house when they get
there two boys from his school are
trying to rob her and ambush donny and
gretchen
the two others run off while the one boy
holds a knife to donny's throat
suddenly a car swerves to avoid grandma
death and runs gretchen over killing her
the driver is elizabeth's boyfriend
frank wearing the rabbit costume from
donny's vision
donnie shoots frank in the eye and takes
gretchen's body home when he gets there
he sees a dark cloud in the sky forming
into a vortex he drives up the hills
near his town and watches it from afar
seeing the full scale of it all the
plane as mom and sister are in get
caught up in the vortex and time seems
to rewind donnie wakes up and it is the
2nd of october the date where he first
woke up on the golf course he laughs and
goes back to sleep this time he is in
bed when he is crushed and killed by the
engine that crashes into his bedroom
around town those who have been affected
by donnie in the last month wake up from
their dreams looking scared and confused
gretchen cycles past darko's house
in this timeline she had never met
donnie she and donnie's mother seem to
recognize each other without remembering
why and they wave to each other as the
film ends on a somber note donnie darko
is a complex film that uses the concept
of time travel throughout it in the
order of its narrative
the plot in itself has wormholes where
donnie travels through time or sees
things out of time he sees frank with an
eye shot out before he shoots it and
sees bubbles where people will be
finally events are changed by his death
they never happen again all the bad
things that happen to characters
cunningham's arrest the english teacher
being fired gretchen's death are undone
because donny dies
this links into a common fan theory
about dani being the symbolism of christ
sacrificing his life for their sins
religious themes are woven prominently
throughout the film ms farmer is a
devout christian who talks about
righteousness love and fear the movie
donnie and gretchen watched together is
called the last temptation of christ and
even the bunny is symbolic of easter the
christian celebration of jesus's
crucifixion and resurrection
another aspect is the impending
apocalypse a common religious theme that
one day the world will end the film also
can be seen as a commentary on
conformity and connection to the world
dani is constantly fighting against
others and questioning what others
believe in
he stands up for what he thinks is right
however he is increasingly disconnected
from the real world as his visions
increase
this disconnection is portrayed through
much of the movie's filming direction
on multiple occasions roaming shots
around the town and school have only the
sound of music playing and they are
close up slow motion moments of people
living interacting with each other as
the camera pans between them and one
fluid take
this gives the viewer the perspective of
donnie
seeing everyone else living their lives
but only witnessing it in a disconnected
way almost a ghost around them
for some viewers this has led to the
theory that donny was always dead and he
is a ghost in the film somewhere in
between life and death
thank you for watching do you have any
theories about the film comment below
and share your ideas please remember to
like the video and subscribe to the
channel see you next time